Avaunt! and quit my sight!  Let the Earth hide thee!
  Thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold!
  Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
  Which Thou dost glare with! Hence, horrible shadow!
  Unreal mockery hence!
                        Macbeth.

Continuation of the History of Don Raymond.

My journey was uncommonly agreeable:  I found the Baron a Man of some
sense, but little knowledge of the world.  He had past a great part of
his life without stirring beyond the precincts of his own domains, and
consequently his manners were far from being the most polished:  But He
was hearty, good-humoured, and friendly.  His attention to me was all
that I could wish, and I had every reason to be satisfied with his
behaviour. His ruling passion was Hunting, which He had brought himself
to consider as a serious occupation; and when talking over some
remarkable chace, He treated the subject with as much gravity as it had
been a Battle on which the fate of two kingdoms was depending.  I
happened to be a tolerable Sportsman:  Soon after my arrival at
Lindenberg I gave some proofs of my dexterity.  The Baron immediately
marked me down for a Man of Genius, and vowed to me an eternal
friendship.

That friendship was become to me by no means indifferent.  At the
Castle of Lindenberg I beheld for the first time your Sister, the
lovely Agnes.  For me whose heart was unoccupied, and who grieved at
the void, to see her and to love her were the same.  I found in Agnes
all that was requisite to secure my affection.  She was then scarcely
sixteen; Her person light and elegant was already formed; She possessed
several talents in perfection, particularly those of Music and drawing:
Her character was gay, open, and good-humoured; and the graceful
simplicity of her dress and manners formed an advantageous contrast to
the art and studied Coquetry of the Parisian Dames, whom I had just
quitted.  From the moment that I beheld her, I felt the most lively
interest in her fate.  I made many enquiries respecting her of the
Baroness.

'She is my Niece,' replied that Lady; 'You are still ignorant, Don
Alphonso, that I am your Countrywoman.  I am Sister to the Duke of
Medina Celi:  Agnes is the Daughter of my second Brother, Don Gaston:
She has been destined to the Convent from her cradle, and will soon
make her profession at Madrid.'

(Here Lorenzo interrupted the Marquis by an exclamation of surprise.

'Intended for the Convent from her cradle?' said He; 'By heaven, this
is the first word that I ever heard of such a design!'

'I believe it, my dear Lorenzo,' answered Don Raymond; 'But you must
listen to me with patience.  You will not be less surprised, when I
relate some particulars of your family still unknown to you, and which
I have learnt from the mouth of Agnes herself.'

He then resumed his narrative as follows.)

You cannot but be aware that your Parents were unfortunately Slaves to
the grossest superstition:  When this foible was called into play,
their every other sentiment, their every other passion yielded to its
irresistible strength.  While She was big with Agnes, your Mother was
seized by a dangerous illness, and given over by her Physicians.  In
this situation, Donna Inesilla vowed, that if She recovered from her
malady, the Child then living in her bosom if a Girl should be
dedicated to St. Clare, if a Boy to St. Benedict.  Her prayers were
heard; She got rid of her complaint; Agnes entered the world alive, and
was immediately destined to the service of St. Clare.

Don Gaston readily chimed in with his Lady's wishes: But knowing the
sentiments of the Duke, his Brother, respecting a Monastic life, it was
determined that your Sister's destination should be carefully concealed
from him.  The better to guard the secret, it was resolved that Agnes
should accompany her Aunt, Donna Rodolpha into Germany, whither that
Lady was on the point of following her new-married Husband, Baron
Lindenberg.  On her arrival at that Estate, the young Agnes was put
into a Convent, situated but a few miles from the Castle.  The Nuns to
whom her education was confided performed their charge with exactitude:
They made her a perfect Mistress of many talents, and strove to infuse
into her mind a taste for the retirement and tranquil pleasures of a
Convent.  But a secret instinct made the young Recluse sensible that
She was not born for solitude:  In all the freedom of youth and gaiety,
She scrupled not to treat as ridiculous many ceremonies which the Nuns
regarded with awe; and She was never more happy than when her lively
imagination inspired her with some scheme to plague the stiff Lady
Abbess, or the ugly ill-tempered old Porteress.  She looked with
disgust upon the prospect before her:  However no alternative was
offered to her, and She submitted to the decree of her Parents, though
not without secret repining.

That repugnance She had not art enough to conceal long:  Don Gaston was
informed of it.  Alarmed, Lorenzo, lest your affection for her should
oppose itself to his projects, and lest you should positively object to
your Sister's misery, He resolved to keep the whole affair from YOUR
knowledge as well as the Duke's, till the sacrifice should be
consummated.  The season of her taking the veil was fixed for the time
when you should be upon your travels:  In the meanwhile no hint was
dropped of Donna Inesilla's fatal vow.  Your Sister was never permitted
to know your direction.  All your letters were read before She received
them, and those parts effaced, which were likely to nourish her
inclination for the world:  Her answers were dictated either by her
Aunt, or by Dame Cunegonda, her Governess.  These particulars I learnt
partly from Agnes, partly from the Baroness herself.

I immediately determined upon rescuing this lovely Girl from a fate so
contrary to her inclinations, and ill-suited to her merit.  I
endeavoured to ingratiate myself into her favour:  I boasted of my
friendship and intimacy with you.  She listened to me with avidity; She
seemed to devour my words while I spoke in your praise, and her eyes
thanked me for my affection to her Brother.  My constant and unremitted
attention at length gained me her heart, and with difficulty I obliged
her to confess that She loved me.  When however, I proposed her
quitting the Castle of Lindenberg, She rejected the idea in positive
terms.

'Be generous, Alphonso,' She said; 'You possess my heart, but use not
the gift ignobly.  Employ not your ascendancy over me in persuading me
to take a step, at which I should hereafter have to blush.  I am young
and deserted:  My Brother, my only Friend, is separated from me, and my
other Relations act with me as my Enemies.  Take pity on my unprotected
situation.  Instead of seducing me to an action which would cover me
with shame, strive rather to gain the affections of those who govern
me.  The Baron esteems you.  My Aunt, to others ever harsh proud and
contemptuous, remembers that you rescued her from the hands of
Murderers, and wears with you alone the appearance of kindness and
benignity.  Try then your influence over my Guardians.  If they consent
to our union my hand is yours:  From your account of my Brother, I
cannot doubt your obtaining his approbation:  And when they find the
impossibility of executing their design, I trust that my Parents will
excuse my disobedience, and expiate by some other sacrifice my Mother's
fatal vow.'

From the first moment that I beheld Agnes, I had endeavoured to
conciliate the favour of her Relations.  Authorised by the confession
of her regard, I redoubled my exertions.  My principal Battery was
directed against the Baroness; It was easy to discover that her word
was law in the Castle:  Her Husband paid her the most absolute
submission, and considered her as a superior Being.  She was about
forty:  In her youth She had been a Beauty; But her charms had been
upon that large scale which can but ill sustain the shock of years:
However She still possessed some remains of them.  Her understanding
was strong and excellent when not obscured by prejudice, which
unluckily was but seldom the case.  Her passions were violent:  She
spared no pains to gratify them, and pursued with unremitting vengeance
those who opposed themselves to her wishes.  The warmest of Friends,
the most inveterate of Enemies, such was the Baroness Lindenberg.

I laboured incessantly to please her:  Unluckily I succeeded but too
well.  She seemed gratified by my attention, and treated me with a
distinction accorded by her to no one else.  One of my daily
occupations was reading to her for several hours:  Those hours I should
much rather have past with Agnes; But as I was conscious that
complaisance for her Aunt would advance our union, I submitted with a
good grace to the penance imposed upon me.  Donna Rodolpha's Library
was principally composed of old Spanish Romances:  These were her
favourite studies, and once a day one of these unmerciful Volumes was
put regularly into my hands.  I read the wearisome adventures of
'Perceforest,' 'Tirante the White,' 'Palmerin of England,' and 'the
Knight of the Sun,' till the Book was on the point of falling from my
hands through Ennui.  However, the increasing pleasure which the
Baroness seemed to take in my society, encouraged me to persevere; and
latterly She showed for me a partiality so marked, that Agnes advised
me to seize the first opportunity of declaring our mutual passion to
her Aunt.

One Evening, I was alone with Donna Rodolpha in her own apartment.  As
our readings generally treated of love, Agnes was never permitted to
assist at them.  I was just congratulating myself on having finished
'The Loves of Tristan and the Queen Iseult----'

'Ah!  The Unfortunates!' cried the Baroness; 'How say you, Segnor?  Do
you think it possible for Man to feel an attachment so disinterested
and sincere?'

'I cannot doubt it,' replied I; 'My own heart furnishes me with the
certainty.  Ah! Donna Rodolpha, might I but hope for your approbation
of my love!  Might I but confess the name of my Mistress without
incurring your resentment!'

She interrupted me.

'Suppose, I were to spare you that confession?  Suppose I were to
acknowledge that the object of your desires is not unknown to me?
Suppose I were to say that She returns your affection, and laments not
less sincerely than yourself the unhappy vows which separate her from
you?'

'Ah! Donna Rodolpha!' I exclaimed, throwing myself upon my knees before
her, and pressing her hand to my lips, 'You have discovered my secret!
What is your decision?  Must I despair, or may I reckon upon your
favour?'

She withdrew not the hand which I held; But She turned from me, and
covered her face with the other.

'How can I refuse it you?' She replied; 'Ah! Don Alphonso, I have long
perceived to whom your attentions were directed, but till now I
perceived not the impression which they made upon my heart.

At length I can no longer hide my weakness either from myself or from
you.  I yield to the violence of my passion, and own that I adore you!
For three long months I stifled my desires; But grown stronger by
resistance, I submit to their impetuosity.  Pride, fear, and honour,
respect for myself, and my engagements to the Baron, all are
vanquished.  I sacrifice them to my love for you, and it still seems to
me that I pay too mean a price for your possession.'

She paused for an answer.--Judge, my Lorenzo, what must have been my
confusion at this discovery.  I at once saw all the magnitude of this
obstacle, which I had raised myself to my happiness.  The Baroness had
placed those attentions to her own account, which I had merely paid her
for the sake of Agnes:  And the strength of her expressions, the looks
which accompanied them, and my knowledge of her revengeful disposition
made me tremble for myself and my Beloved.  I was silent for some
minutes.  I knew not how to reply to her declaration:  I could only
resolve to clear up the mistake without delay, and for the present to
conceal from her knowledge the name of my Mistress.  No sooner had She
avowed her passion than the transports which before were evident in my
features gave place to consternation and constraint.  I dropped her
hand, and rose from my knees.  The change in my countenance did not
escape her observation.

'What means this silence?' said She in a trembling voice; 'Where is
that joy which you led me to expect?'

'Forgive me, Segnora,' I answered, 'if what necessity forces from me
should seem harsh and ungrateful:  To encourage you in an error, which,
however it may flatter myself, must prove to you the source of
disappointment, would make me appear criminal in every eye.  Honour
obliges me to inform you that you have mistaken for the solicitude of
Love what was only the attention of Friendship.  The latter sentiment
is that which I wished to excite in your bosom:  To entertain a warmer,
respect for you forbids me, and gratitude for the Baron's generous
treatment. Perhaps these reasons would not be sufficient to shield me
from your attractions, were it not that my affections are already
bestowed upon another.  You have charms, Segnora, which might captivate
the most insensible; No heart unoccupied could resist them.  Happy is
it for me that mine is no longer in my possession; or I should have to
reproach myself for ever with having violated the Laws of Hospitality.
Recollect yourself, noble Lady; Recollect what is owed by you to
honour, by me to the Baron, and replace by esteem and friendship those
sentiments which I never can return.'

The Baroness turned pale at this unexpected and positive declaration:
She doubted whether She slept or woke.  At length recovering from her
surprise, consternation gave place to rage, and the blood rushed back
into her cheeks with violence.

'Villain!' She cried; 'Monster of deceit!  Thus is the avowal of my
love received?  Is it thus that....  But no, no!  It cannot, it
shall not be!  Alphonso, behold me at your feet!  Be witness of my
despair!  Look with pity on a Woman who loves you with sincere
affection!  She who possesses your heart, how has She merited such a
treasure?  What sacrifice has She made to you?

What raises her above Rodolpha?'

I endeavoured to lift her from her Knees.

'For God's sake, Segnora, restrain these transports: They disgrace
yourself and me.  Your exclamations may be heard, and your secret
divulged to your Attendants.  I see that my presence only irritates
you: permit me to retire.'

I prepared to quit the apartment:  The Baroness caught me suddenly by
the arm.

'And who is this happy Rival?' said She in a menacing tone; 'I will
know her name, and WHEN I know it.... ! She is someone in my power;
You entreated my favour, my protection!  Let me but find her, let me
but know who dares to rob me of your heart, and She shall suffer every
torment which jealousy and disappointment can inflict!  Who is She?
Answer me this moment.  Hope not to conceal her from my vengeance!
Spies shall be set over you; every step, every look shall be watched;
Your eyes will discover my Rival; I shall know her, and when She is
found, tremble, Alphonso for her and for yourself!'

As She uttered these last words her fury mounted to such a pitch as to
stop her powers of respiration.  She panted, groaned, and at length
fainted away.  As She was falling I caught her in my arms, and placed
her upon a Sopha.  Then hastening to the door, I summoned her Women to
her assistance; I committed her to their care, and seized the
opportunity of escaping.

Agitated and confused beyond expression I bent my steps towards the
Garden.  The benignity with which the Baroness had listened to me at
first raised my hopes to the highest pitch:  I imagined her to have
perceived my attachment for her Niece, and to approve of it.  Extreme
was my disappointment at understanding the true purport of her
discourse.  I knew not what course to take: The superstition of the
Parents of Agnes, aided by her Aunt's unfortunate passion, seemed to
oppose such obstacles to our union as were almost insurmountable.

As I past by a low parlour, whose windows looked into the Garden,
through the door which stood half open I observed Agnes seated at a
Table.  She was occupied in drawing, and several unfinished sketches
were scattered round her.  I entered, still undetermined whether I
should acquaint her with the declaration of the Baroness.

'Oh! is it only you?' said She, raising her head; 'You are no Stranger,
and I shall continue my occupation without ceremony. Take a Chair, and
seat yourself by me.'

I obeyed, and placed myself near the Table.  Unconscious what I was
doing, and totally occupied by the scene which had just passed, I took
up some of the drawings, and cast my eye over them.  One of the
subjects struck me from its singularity.  It represented the great Hall
of the Castle of Lindenberg.  A door conducting to a narrow staircase
stood half open.  In the foreground appeared a Groupe of figures,
placed in the most grotesque attitudes; Terror was expressed upon every
countenance.

Here was One upon his knees with his eyes cast up to heaven, and
praying most devoutly; There Another was creeping away upon all fours.
Some hid their faces in their cloaks or the laps of their Companions;
Some had concealed themselves beneath a Table, on which the remnants of
a feast were visible; While Others with gaping mouths and eyes
wide-stretched pointed to a Figure, supposed to have created this
disturbance.  It represented a Female of more than human stature,
clothed in the habit of some religious order.  Her face was veiled; On
her arm hung a chaplet of beads; Her dress was in several places
stained with the blood which trickled from a wound upon her bosom. In
one hand She held a Lamp, in the other a large Knife, and She seemed
advancing towards the iron gates of the Hall.

'What does this mean, Agnes?' said I; 'Is this some invention of your
own?'

She cast her eye upon the drawing.

'Oh! no,' She replied; ''Tis the invention of much wiser heads than
mine.  But can you possibly have lived at Lindenberg for three whole
Months without hearing of the Bleeding Nun?'

'You are the first, who ever mentioned the name to me.  Pray, who may
the Lady be?'

'That is more than I can pretend to tell you.  All my knowledge of her
History comes from an old tradition in this family, which has been
handed down from Father to Son, and is firmly credited throughout the
Baron's domains.  Nay, the Baron believes it himself; and as for my
Aunt who has a natural turn for the marvellous, She would sooner doubt
the veracity of the Bible, than of the Bleeding Nun.  Shall I tell you
this History?'

I answered that She would oblige me much by relating it:  She resumed
her drawing, and then proceeded as follows in a tone of burlesqued
gravity.

'It is surprising that in all the Chronicles of past times, this
remarkable Personage is never once mentioned.  Fain would I recount to
you her life; But unluckily till after her death She was never known to
have existed.  Then first did She think it necessary to make some noise
in the world, and with that intention She made bold to seize upon the
Castle of Lindenberg. Having a good taste, She took up her abode in the
best room of the House:  and once established there, She began to amuse
herself by knocking about the tables and chairs in the middle of the
night.  Perhaps She was a bad Sleeper, but this I have never been able
to ascertain.  According to the tradition, this entertainment commenced
about a Century ago.  It was accompanied with shrieking, howling,
groaning, swearing, and many other agreeable noises of the same kind.
But though one particular room was more especially honoured with her
visits, She did not entirely confine herself to it.  She occasionally
ventured into the old Galleries, paced up and down the spacious Halls,
or sometimes stopping at the doors of the Chambers, She wept and wailed
there to the universal terror of the Inhabitants.  In these nocturnal
excursions She was seen by different People, who all describe her
appearance as you behold it here, traced by the hand of her unworthy
Historian.'

The singularity of this account insensibly engaged my attention.

'Did She never speak to those who met her?' said I.

'Not She.  The specimens indeed, which She gave nightly of her talents
for conversation, were by no means inviting.  Sometimes the Castle rung
with oaths and execrations:  A Moment after She repeated her
Paternoster: Now She howled out the most horrible blasphemies, and then
chaunted De Profundis, as orderly as if still in the Choir.  In short
She seemed a mighty capricious Being:  But whether She prayed or
cursed, whether She was impious or devout, She always contrived to
terrify her Auditors out of their senses.  The Castle became scarcely
habitable; and its Lord was so frightened by these midnight Revels,
that one fine morning He was found dead in his bed.  This success
seemed to please the Nun mightily, for now She made more noise than
ever.  But the next Baron proved too cunning for her.  He made his
appearance with a celebrated Exorciser in his hand, who feared not to
shut himself up for a night in the haunted Chamber.  There it seems
that He had an hard battle with the Ghost, before She would promise to
be quiet.  She was obstinate, but He was more so, and at length She
consented to let the Inhabitants of the Castle take a good night's
rest.  For some time after no news was heard of her.  But at the end of
five years the Exorciser died, and then the Nun ventured to peep abroad
again.  However, She was now grown much more tractable and
well-behaved.  She walked about in silence, and never made her
appearance above once in five years. This custom, if you will believe
the Baron, She still continues. He is fully persuaded, that on the
fifth of May of every fifth year, as soon as the Clock strikes One, the
Door of the haunted Chamber opens.  (Observe, that this room has been
shut up for near a Century.)  Then out walks the Ghostly Nun with her
Lamp and dagger:  She descends the staircase of the Eastern Tower; and
crosses the great Hall!  On that night the Porter always leaves the
Gates of the Castle open, out of respect to the Apparition:  Not that
this is thought by any means necessary, since She could easily whip
through the Keyhole if She chose it; But merely out of politeness, and
to prevent her from making her exit in a way so derogatory to the
dignity of her Ghost-ship.'

'And whither does She go on quitting the Castle?'

'To Heaven, I hope; But if She does, the place certainly is not to her
taste, for She always returns after an hour's absence. The Lady then
retires to her chamber, and is quiet for another five years.'

'And you believe this, Agnes?'

'How can you ask such a question?  No, no, Alphonso! I have too much
reason to lament superstition's influence to be its Victim myself.
However I must not avow my incredulity to the Baroness: She entertains
not a doubt of the truth of this History.  As to Dame Cunegonda, my
Governess, She protests that fifteen years ago She saw the Spectre with
her own eyes.  She related to me one evening how She and several other
Domestics had been terrified while at Supper by the appearance of the
Bleeding Nun, as the Ghost is called in the Castle:  'Tis from her
account that I drew this sketch, and you may be certain that Cunegonda
was not omitted.  There She is!  I shall never forget what a passion
She was in, and how ugly She looked while She scolded me for having
made her picture so like herself!'

Here She pointed to a burlesque figure of an old Woman in an attitude
of terror.

In spite of the melancholy which oppressed me, I could not help smiling
at the playful imagination of Agnes:  She had perfectly preserved Dame
Cunegonda's resemblance, but had so much exaggerated every fault, and
rendered every feature so irresistibly laughable, that I could easily
conceive the Duenna's anger.

'The figure is admirable, my dear Agnes! I knew not that you possessed
such talents for the ridiculous.'

'Stay a moment,' She replied; 'I will show you a figure still more
ridiculous than Dame Cunegonda's.  If it pleases you, you may dispose
of it as seems best to yourself.'

She rose, and went to a Cabinet at some little distance. Unlocking a
drawer, She took out a small case, which She opened, and presented to
me.

'Do you know the resemblance?' said She smiling.

It was her own.

Transported at the gift, I pressed the portrait to my lips with
passion:  I threw myself at her feet, and declared my gratitude in the
warmest and most affectionate terms.  She listened to me with
complaisance, and assured me that She shared my sentiments: When
suddenly She uttered a loud shriek, disengaged the hand which I held,
and flew from the room by a door which opened to the Garden.  Amazed at
this abrupt departure, I rose hastily from my knees.  I beheld with
confusion the Baroness standing near me glowing with jealousy, and
almost choaked with rage.  On recovering from her swoon, She had
tortured her imagination to discover her concealed Rival.  No one
appeared to deserve her suspicions more than Agnes.  She immediately
hastened to find her Niece, tax her with encouraging my addresses, and
assure herself whether her conjectures were well-grounded.
Unfortunately She had already seen enough to need no other
confirmation.  She arrived at the door of the room at the precise
moment, when Agnes gave me her Portrait.  She heard me profess an
everlasting attachment to her Rival, and saw me kneeling at her feet.
She advanced to separate us; We were too much occupied by each other to
perceive her approach, and were not aware of it, till Agnes beheld her
standing by my side.

Rage on the part of Donna Rodolpha, embarrassment on mine, for some
time kept us both silent.  The Lady recovered herself first.

'My suspicions then were just,' said She; 'The Coquetry of my Niece has
triumphed, and 'tis to her that I am sacrificed.  In one respect
however I am fortunate:  I shall not be the only one who laments a
disappointed passion.  You too shall know, what it is to love without
hope!  I daily expect orders for restoring Agnes to her Parents.
Immediately upon her arrival in Spain, She will take the veil, and
place an insuperable barrier to your union.  You may spare your
supplications.' She continued, perceiving me on the point of speaking;
'My resolution is fixed and immoveable.  Your Mistress shall remain a
close Prisoner in her chamber till She exchanges this Castle for the
Cloister. Solitude will perhaps recall her to a sense of her duty:  But
to prevent your opposing that wished event, I must inform you, Don
Alphonso, that your presence here is no longer agreeable either to the
Baron or Myself.  It was not to talk nonsense to my Niece that your
Relations sent you to Germany:  Your business was to travel, and I
should be sorry to impede any longer so excellent a design.  Farewell,
Segnor; Remember, that tomorrow morning we meet for the last time.'

Having said this, She darted upon me a look of pride, contempt, and
malice, and quitted the apartment.  I also retired to mine, and
consumed the night in planning the means of rescuing Agnes from the
power of her tyrannical Aunt.

After the positive declaration of its Mistress, it was impossible for
me to make a longer stay at the Castle of Lindenberg. Accordingly I the
next day announced my immediate departure.  The Baron declared that it
gave him sincere pain; and He expressed himself in my favour so warmly,
that I endeavoured to win him over to my interest.  Scarcely had I
mentioned the name of Agnes when He stopped me short, and said, that it
was totally out of his power to interfere in the business.  I saw that
it was in vain to argue; The Baroness governed her Husband with
despotic sway, and I easily perceived that She had prejudiced him
against the match.  Agnes did not appear:  I entreated permission to
take leave of her, but my prayer was rejected.  I was obliged to depart
without seeing her.

At quitting him the Baron shook my hand affectionately, and assured me
that as soon as his Niece was gone, I might consider his House as my
own.

'Farewell, Don Alphonso!' said the Baroness, and stretched out her hand
to me.

I took it, and offered to carry it to my lips.  She prevented me.

Her Husband was at the other end of the room, and out of hearing.

'Take care of yourself,' She continued; 'My love is become hatred, and
my wounded pride shall not be unatoned.  Go where you will, my
vengeance shall follow you!'

She accompanied these words with a look sufficient to make me tremble.
I answered not, but hastened to quit the Castle.

As my Chaise drove out of the Court, I looked up to the windows of your
Sister's chamber.  Nobody was to be seen there:  I threw myself back
despondent in my Carriage.  I was attended by no other servants than a
Frenchman whom I had hired at Strasbourg in Stephano's room, and my
little Page whom I before mentioned to you.  The fidelity,
intelligence, and good temper of Theodore had already made him dear to
me; But He now prepared to lay an obligation on me, which made me look
upon him as a Guardian Genius.  Scarcely had we proceeded half a mile
from the Castle, when He rode up to the Chaise-door.

'Take courage, Segnor!' said He in Spanish, which He had already learnt
to speak with fluency and correctness. 'While you were with the Baron,
I watched the moment when Dame Cunegonda was below stairs, and mounted
into the chamber over that of Donna Agnes.  I sang as loud as I could a
little German air well-known to her, hoping that She would recollect my
voice.  I was not disappointed, for I soon heard her window open.  I
hastened to let down a string with which I had provided myself:  Upon
hearing the casement closed again, I drew up the string, and fastened
to it I found this scrap of paper.'

He then presented me with a small note addressed to me.  I opened it
with impatience:  It contained the following words written in pencil:

Conceal yourself for the next fortnight in some neighbouring Village.
My Aunt will believe you to have quitted Lindenberg, and I shall be
restored to liberty.  I will be in the West Pavilion at twelve on the
night of the thirtieth.  Fail not to be there, and we shall have an
opportunity of concerting our future plans.  Adieu.
Agnes.

At perusing these lines my transports exceeded all bounds; Neither did
I set any to the expressions of gratitude which I heaped upon Theodore.
In fact his address and attention merited my warmest praise.  You will
readily believe that I had not entrusted him with my passion for Agnes;
But the arch Youth had too much discernment not to discover my secret,
and too much discretion not to conceal his knowledge of it.  He
observed in silence what was going on, nor strove to make himself an
Agent in the business till my interests required his interference.  I
equally admired his judgment, his penetration, his address, and his
fidelity.  This was not the first occasion in which I had found him of
infinite use, and I was every day more convinced of his quickness and
capacity.  During my short stay at Strasbourg, He had applied himself
diligently to learning the rudiments of Spanish:  He continued to study
it, and with so much success that He spoke it with the same facility as
his native language.  He past the greatest part of his time in reading;
He had acquired much information for his Age; and united the advantages
of a lively countenance and prepossessing figure to an excellent
understanding and the very best of hearts.  He is now fifteen; He is
still in my service, and when you see him, I am sure that He will
please you.  But excuse this digression:  I return to the subject which
I quitted.

I obeyed the instructions of Agnes.  I proceeded to Munich. There I
left my Chaise under the care of Lucas, my French Servant, and then
returned on Horseback to a small Village about four miles distant from
the Castle of Lindenberg.  Upon arriving there a story was related to
the Host at whose Inn I descended, which prevented his wondering at my
making so long a stay in his House. The old Man fortunately was
credulous and incurious: He believed all I said, and sought to know no
more than what I thought proper to tell him.  Nobody was with me but
Theodore; Both were disguised, and as we kept ourselves close, we were
not suspected to be other than what we seemed.  In this manner the
fortnight passed away.  During that time I had the pleasing conviction
that Agnes was once more at liberty.  She past through the Village with
Dame Cunegonda:  She seemed in health and spirits, and talked to her
Companion without any appearance of constraint.

'Who are those Ladies?' said I to my Host, as the Carriage past.

'Baron Lindenberg's Niece with her Governess,' He replied; 'She goes
regularly every Friday to the Convent of St. Catharine, in which She
was brought up, and which is situated about a mile from hence.'

You may be certain that I waited with impatience for the ensuing
Friday.  I again beheld my lovely Mistress.  She cast her eyes upon me,
as She passed the Inn-door.  A blush which overspread her cheek told me
that in spite of my disguise I had been recognised.  I bowed
profoundly.  She returned the compliment by a slight inclination of the
head as if made to one inferior, and looked another way till the
Carriage was out of sight.

The long-expected, long-wished for night arrived.  It was calm, and the
Moon was at the full.  As soon as the Clock struck eleven I hastened to
my appointment, determined not to be too late. Theodore had provided a
Ladder; I ascended the Garden wall without difficulty; The Page
followed me, and drew the Ladder after us. I posted myself in the West
Pavilion, and waited impatiently for the approach of Agnes.  Every
breeze that whispered, every leaf that fell, I believed to be her
footstep, and hastened to meet her.  Thus was I obliged to pass a full
hour, every minute of which appeared to me an age.  The Castle Bell at
length tolled twelve, and scarcely could I believe the night to be no
further advanced.  Another quarter of an hour elapsed, and I heard the
light foot of my Mistress approaching the Pavilion with precaution.  I
flew to receive her, and conducted her to a seat.  I threw myself at
her feet, and was expressing my joy at seeing her, when She thus
interrupted me.

'We have no time to lose, Alphonso:  The moments are precious, for
though no more a Prisoner, Cunegonda watches my every step. An express
is arrived from my Father; I must depart immediately for Madrid, and
'tis with difficulty that I have obtained a week's delay.  The
superstition of my Parents, supported by the representations of my
cruel Aunt, leaves me no hope of softening them to compassion.  In this
dilemma I have resolved to commit myself to your honour:  God grant
that you may never give me cause to repent my resolution!  Flight is my
only resource from the horrors of a Convent, and my imprudence must be
excused by the urgency of the danger.  Now listen to the plan by which
I hope to effect my escape.

'We are now at the thirtieth of April.  On the fifth day from this the
Visionary Nun is expected to appear.  In my last visit to the Convent I
provided myself with a dress proper for the character:  A Friend, whom
I have left there and to whom I made no scruple to confide my secret,
readily consented to supply me with a religious habit.  Provide a
carriage, and be with it at a little distance from the great Gate of
the Castle.  As soon as the Clock strikes 'one,' I shall quit my
chamber, drest in the same apparel as the Ghost is supposed to wear.
Whoever meets me will be too much terrified to oppose my escape.  I
shall easily reach the door, and throw myself under your protection.
Thus far success is certain:  But Oh!  Alphonso, should you deceive me!
Should you despise my imprudence and reward it with ingratitude, the
World will not hold a Being more wretched than myself!  I feel all the
dangers to which I shall be exposed.  I feel that I am giving you a
right to treat me with levity:  But I rely upon your love, upon your
honour!  The step which I am on the point of taking, will incense my
Relations against me:  Should you desert me, should you betray the
trust reposed in you, I shall have no friend to punish your insult, or
support my cause.  On yourself alone rests all my hope, and if your own
heart does not plead in my behalf, I am undone for ever!'

The tone in which She pronounced these words was so touching, that in
spite of my joy at receiving her promise to follow me, I could not help
being affected.  I also repined in secret at not having taken the
precaution to provide a Carriage at the Village, in which case I might
have carried off Agnes that very night. Such an attempt was now
impracticable:  Neither Carriage or Horses were to be procured nearer
than Munich, which was distant from Lindenberg two good days journey.
I was therefore obliged to chime in with her plan, which in truth
seemed well arranged: Her disguise would secure her from being stopped
in quitting the Castle, and would enable her to step into the Carriage
at the very Gate without difficulty or losing time.

Agnes reclined her head mournfully upon my shoulder, and by the light
of the Moon I saw tears flowing down her cheek.  I strove to dissipate
her melancholy, and encouraged her to look forward to the prospect of
happiness.  I protested in the most solemn terms that her virtue and
innocence would be safe in my keeping, and that till the church had
made her my lawful Wife, her honour should be held by me as sacred as a
Sister's.  I told her that my first care should be to find you out,
Lorenzo, and reconcile you to our union; and I was continuing to speak
in the same strain, when a noise without alarmed me.  Suddenly the door
of the Pavilion was thrown open, and Cunegonda stood before us.  She
had heard Agnes steal out of her chamber, followed her into the Garden,
and perceived her entering the Pavilion.  Favoured by the Trees which
shaded it, and unperceived by Theodore who waited at a little distance,
She had approached in silence, and overheard our whole conversation.

'Admirable!' cried Cunegonda in a voice shrill with passion, while
Agnes uttered a loud shriek; 'By St. Barbara, young Lady, you have an
excellent invention!  You must personate the Bleeding Nun, truly?  What
impiety!  What incredulity!  Marry, I have a good mind to let you
pursue your plan:  When the real Ghost met you, I warrant, you would be
in a pretty condition!  Don Alphonso, you ought to be ashamed of
yourself for seducing a young ignorant Creature to leave her family and
Friends: However, for this time at least I shall mar your wicked
designs. The noble Lady shall be informed of the whole affair, and
Agnes must defer playing the Spectre till a better opportunity.
Farewell, Segnor-- Donna Agnes, let me have the honour of conducting
your Ghost-ship back to your apartment.'

She approached the Sopha on which her trembling Pupil was seated, took
her by the hand, and prepared to lead her from the Pavilion.

I detained her, and strove by entreaties, soothing, promises, and
flattery to win her to my party:  But finding all that I could say of
no avail, I abandoned the vain attempt.

'Your obstinacy must be its own punishment,' said I; 'But one resource
remains to save Agnes and myself, and I shall not hesitate to employ
it.'

Terrified at this menace, She again endeavoured to quit the Pavilion;
But I seized her by the wrist, and detained her forcibly.  At the same
moment Theodore, who had followed her into the room, closed the door,
and prevented her escape.  I took the veil of Agnes:  I threw it round
the Duenna's head, who uttered such piercing shrieks that in spite of
our distance from the Castle, I dreaded their being heard.  At length I
succeeded in gagging her so compleatly that She could not produce a
single sound.  Theodore and myself with some difficulty next contrived
to bind her hands and feet with our handkerchiefs; And I advised Agnes
to regain her chamber with all diligence.  I promised that no harm
should happen to Cunegonda, bad her remember that on the fifth of May I
should be in waiting at the Great Gate of the Castle, and took of her
an affectionate farewell.  Trembling and uneasy She had scarce power
enough to signify her consent to my plans, and fled back to her
apartment in disorder and confusion.

In the meanwhile Theodore assisted me in carrying off my antiquated
Prize.  She was hoisted over the wall, placed before me upon my Horse
like a Portmanteau, and I galloped away with her from the Castle of
Lindenberg.  The unlucky Duenna never had made a more disagreeable
journey in her life:  She was jolted and shaken till She was become
little more than an animated Mummy; not to mention her fright when we
waded through a small River through which it was necessary to pass in
order to regain the Village.  Before we reached the Inn, I had already
determined how to dispose of the troublesome Cunegonda.  We entered the
Street in which the Inn stood, and while the page knocked, I waited at
a little distance.  The Landlord opened the door with a Lamp in his
hand.

'Give me the light!' said Theodore; 'My Master is coming.'

He snatched the Lamp hastily, and purposely let it fall upon the
ground:  The Landlord returned to the Kitchen to re-light the Lamp,
leaving the door open.  I profited by the obscurity, sprang from my
Horse with Cunegonda in my arms, darted up stairs, reached my chamber
unperceived, and unlocking the door of a spacious Closet, stowed her
within it, and then turned the Key. The Landlord and Theodore soon
after appeared with lights:  The Former expressed himself a little
surprised at my returning so late, but asked no impertinent questions.
He soon quitted the room, and left me to exult in the success of my
undertaking.

I immediately paid a visit to my Prisoner.  I strove to persuade her
submitting with patience to her temporary confinement.  My attempt was
unsuccessful.  Unable to speak or move, She expressed her fury by her
looks, and except at meals I never dared to unbind her, or release her
from the Gag.  At such times I stood over her with a drawn sword, and
protested, that if She uttered a single cry, I would plunge it in her
bosom.  As soon as She had done eating, the Gag was replaced.  I was
conscious that this proceeding was cruel, and could only be justified
by the urgency of circumstances:  As to Theodore, He had no scruples
upon the subject.  Cunegonda's captivity entertained him beyond
measure. During his abode in the Castle, a continual warfare had been
carried on between him and the Duenna; and now that He found his Enemy
so absolutely in his power, He triumphed without mercy.  He seemed to
think of nothing but how to find out new means of plaguing her:
Sometimes He affected to pity her misfortune, then laughed at, abused,
and mimicked her; He played her a thousand tricks, each more provoking
than the other, and amused himself by telling her that her elopement
must have occasioned much surprise at the Baron's.  This was in fact
the case.  No one except Agnes could imagine what was become of Dame
Cunegonda: Every hole and corner was searched for her; The Ponds were
dragged, and the Woods underwent a thorough examination.  Still no Dame
Cunegonda made her appearance.  Agnes kept the secret, and I kept the
Duenna:  The Baroness, therefore, remained in total ignorance
respecting the old Woman's fate, but suspected her to have perished by
suicide.  Thus past away five days, during which I had prepared every
thing necessary for my enterprise.  On quitting Agnes, I had made it my
first business to dispatch a Peasant with a letter to Lucas at Munich,
ordering him to take care that a Coach and four should arrive about ten
o'clock on the fifth of May at the Village of Rosenwald.  He obeyed my
instructions punctually: The Equipage arrived at the time appointed.
As the period of her Lady's elopement drew nearer, Cunegonda's rage
increased.  I verily believe that spight and passion would have killed
her, had I not luckily discovered her prepossession in favour of Cherry
Brandy. With this favourite liquor She was plentifully supplied, and
Theodore always remaining to guard her, the Gag was occasionally
removed.  The liquor seemed to have a wonderful effect in softening the
acrimony of her nature; and her confinement not admitting of any other
amusement, She got drunk regularly once a day just by way of passing
the time.

The fifth of May arrived, a period by me never to be forgotten! Before
the Clock struck twelve, I betook myself to the scene of action.
Theodore followed me on horseback.  I concealed the Carriage in a
spacious Cavern of the Hill, on whose brow the Castle was situated:
This Cavern was of considerable depth, and among the peasants was known
by the name of Lindenberg Hole.  The night was calm and beautiful:  The
Moonbeams fell upon the antient Towers of the Castle, and shed upon
their summits a silver light.  All was still around me:  Nothing was to
be heard except the night breeze sighing among the leaves, the distant
barking of Village Dogs, or the Owl who had established herself in a
nook of the deserted Eastern Turret.  I heard her melancholy shriek,
and looked upwards.  She sat upon the ride of a window, which I
recognized to be that of the haunted Room.  This brought to my
remembrance the story of the Bleeding Nun, and I sighed while I
reflected on the influence of superstition and weakness of human
reason.  Suddenly I heard a faint chorus steal upon the silence of the
night.

'What can occasion that noise, Theodore?'

'A Stranger of distinction,' replied He, 'passed through the Village
today in his way to the Castle:  He is reported to be the Father of
Donna Agnes.  Doubtless, the Baron has given an entertainment to
celebrate his arrival.'

The Castle Bell announced the hour of midnight: This was the usual
signal for the family to retire to Bed.  Soon after I perceived lights
in the Castle moving backwards and forwards in different directions.  I
conjectured the company to be separating.  I could hear the heavy doors
grate as they opened with difficulty, and as they closed again the
rotten Casements rattled in their frames.  The chamber of Agnes was on
the other side of the Castle.  I trembled lest She should have failed
in obtaining the Key of the haunted Room:  Through this it was
necessary for her to pass in order to reach the narrow Staircase by
which the Ghost was supposed to descend into the great Hall.  Agitated
by this apprehension, I kept my eyes constantly fixed upon the window,
where I hoped to perceive the friendly glare of a Lamp borne by Agnes.
I now heard the massy Gates unbarred.  By the candle in his hand I
distinguished old Conrad, the Porter.  He set the Portal doors wide
open, and retired.  The lights in the Castle gradually disappeared, and
at length the whole Building was wrapt in darkness.

While I sat upon a broken ridge of the Hill, the stillness of the scene
inspired me with melancholy ideas not altogether unpleasing.  The
Castle which stood full in my sight, formed an object equally awful and
picturesque. Its ponderous Walls tinged by the moon with solemn
brightness, its old and partly-ruined Towers lifting themselves into
the clouds and seeming to frown on the plains around them, its lofty
battlements oergrown with ivy, and folding Gates expanding in honour of
the Visionary Inhabitant, made me sensible of a sad and reverential
horror. Yet did not these sensations occupy me so fully, as to prevent
me from witnessing with impatience the slow progress of time.  I
approached the Castle, and ventured to walk round it.  A few rays of
light still glimmered in the chamber of Agnes.  I observed them with
joy.  I was still gazing upon them, when I perceived a figure draw near
the window, and the Curtain was carefully closed to conceal the Lamp
which burned there.  Convinced by this observation that Agnes had not
abandoned our plan, I returned with a light heart to my former station.

The half-hour struck!  The three-quarters struck!  My bosom beat high
with hope and expectation.  At length the wished-for sound was heard.
The Bell tolled 'One,' and the Mansion echoed with the noise loud and
solemn.  I looked up to the Casement of the haunted Chamber.  Scarcely
had five minutes elapsed, when the expected light appeared.  I was now
close to the Tower.  The window was not so far from the Ground but that
I fancied I perceived a female figure with a Lamp in her hand moving
slowly along the Apartment.  The light soon faded away, and all was
again dark and gloomy.

Occasional gleams of brightness darted from the Staircase windows as
the lovely Ghost past by them.  I traced the light through the Hall:
It reached the Portal, and at length I beheld Agnes pass through the
folding gates.  She was habited exactly as She had described the
Spectre.  A chaplet of Beads hung upon her arm; her head was enveloped
in a long white veil; Her Nun's dress was stained with blood, and She
had taken care to provide herself with a Lamp and dagger.  She advanced
towards the spot where I stood.  I flew to meet her, and clasped her in
my arms.

  'Agnes!' said I while I pressed her to my bosom,
  Agnes!  Agnes!  Thou art mine!
  Agnes! Agnes! I am thine!
  In my veins while blood shall roll,
  Thou art mine!
  I am thine!
  Thine my body! Thine my soul!

Terrified and breathless She was unable to speak: She dropt her Lamp
and dagger, and sank upon my bosom in silence.  I raised her in my
arms, and conveyed her to the Carriage.  Theodore remained behind in
order to release Dame Cunegonda.  I also charged him with a letter to
the Baroness explaining the whole affair, and entreating her good
offices in reconciling Don Gaston to my union with his Daughter.  I
discovered to her my real name:  I proved to her that my birth and
expectations justified my pretending to her Niece, and assured her,
though it was out of my power to return her love, that I would strive
unceasingly to obtain her esteem and friendship.

I stepped into the Carriage, where Agnes was already seated. Theodore
closed the door, and the Postillions drove away.  At first I was
delighted with the rapidity of our progress; But as soon as we were in
no danger of pursuit, I called to the Drivers, and bad them moderate
their pace.  They strove in vain to obey me.  The Horses refused to
answer the rein, and continued to rush on with astonishing swiftness.
The Postillions redoubled their efforts to stop them, but by kicking
and plunging the Beasts soon released themselves from this restraint.
Uttering a loud shriek, the Drivers were hurled upon the ground.
Immediately thick clouds obscured the sky:  The winds howled around us,
the lightning flashed, and the Thunder roared tremendously.  Never did
I behold so frightful a Tempest!  Terrified by the jar of contending
elements, the Horses seemed every moment to increase their speed.
Nothing could interrupt their career; They dragged the Carriage through
Hedges and Ditches, dashed down the most dangerous precipices, and
seemed to vye in swiftness with the rapidity of the winds.

All this while my Companion lay motionless in my arms.  Truly alarmed
by the magnitude of the danger, I was in vain attempting to recall her
to her senses; when a loud crash announced, that a stop was put to our
progress in the most disagreeable manner. The Carriage was shattered to
pieces.  In falling I struck my temple against a flint.  The pain of
the wound, the violence of the shock, and apprehension for the safety
of Agnes combined to overpower me so compleatly, that my senses forsook
me, and I lay without animation on the ground.

I probably remained for some time in this situation, since when I
opened my eyes, it was broad daylight.  Several Peasants were standing
round me, and seemed disputing whether my recovery was possible.  I
spoke German tolerably well.  As soon as I could utter an articulate
sound, I enquired after Agnes.  What was my surprise and distress, when
assured by the Peasants, that nobody had been seen answering the
description which I gave of her! They told me that in going to their
daily labour they had been alarmed by observing the fragments of my
Carriage, and by hearing the groans of an Horse, the only one of the
four which remained alive: The other Three lay dead by my side.  Nobody
was near me when they came up, and much time had been lost, before they
succeeded in recovering me.  Uneasy beyond expression respecting the
fate of my Companion, I besought the Peasants to disperse themselves in
search of her:  I described her dress, and promised immense rewards to
whoever brought me any intelligence.  As for myself, it was impossible
for me to join in the pursuit: I had broken two of my ribs in the fall:
My arm being dislocated hung useless by my side; and my left leg was
shattered so terribly, that I never expected to recover its use.

The Peasants complied with my request:  All left me except Four, who
made a litter of boughs and prepared to convey me to the neighbouring
Town.  I enquired its name.  It proved to be Ratisbon, and I could
scarcely persuade myself that I had travelled to such a distance in a
single night.  I told the Countrymen that at one o'clock that morning I
had past through the Village of Rosenwald.  They shook their heads
wistfully, and made signs to each other that I must certainly be
delirious.  I was conveyed to a decent Inn and immediately put to bed.
A Physician was sent for, who set my arm with success.  He then
examined my other hurts, and told me that I need be under no
apprehension of the consequences of any of them; But ordered me to keep
myself quiet, and be prepared for a tedious and painful cure.  I
answered him that if He hoped to keep me quiet, He must first endeavour
to procure me some news of a Lady who had quitted Rosenwald in my
company the night before, and had been with me at the moment when the
Coach broke down.  He smiled, and only replied by advising me to make
myself easy, for that all proper care should be taken of me.  As He
quitted me, the Hostess met him at the door of the room.

'The Gentleman is not quite in his right senses;' I heard him say to
her in a low voice; ''Tis the natural consequence of his fall, but that
will soon be over.'

One after another the Peasants returned to the Inn, and informed me
that no traces had been discovered of my unfortunate Mistress.

Uneasiness now became despair. I entreated them to renew their search
in the most urgent terms, doubling the promises which I had already
made them.  My wild and frantic manner confirmed the bye-standers in
the idea of my being delirious.  No signs of the Lady having appeared,
they believed her to be a creature fabricated by my over-heated brain,
and paid no attention to my entreaties.  However, the Hostess assured
me that a fresh enquiry should be made, but I found afterwards that her
promise was only given to quiet me.  No further steps were taken in the
business.

Though my Baggage was left at Munich under the care of my French
Servant, having prepared myself for a long journey, my purse was amply
furnished:  Besides my equipage proved me to be of distinction, and in
consequence all possible attention was paid me at the Inn.  The day
passed away:  Still no news arrived of Agnes.  The anxiety of fear now
gave place to despondency.  I ceased to rave about her and was plunged
in the depth of melancholy reflections.  Perceiving me to be silent and
tranquil, my Attendants believed my delirium to have abated, and that
my malady had taken a favourable turn.  According to the Physician's
order I swallowed a composing medicine; and as soon as the night shut
in, my attendants withdrew and left me to repose.

That repose I wooed in vain.  The agitation of my bosom chased away
sleep.  Restless in my mind, in spite of the fatigue of my body, I
continued to toss about from side to side, till the Clock in a
neighbouring Steeple struck 'One.'  As I listened to the mournful
hollow sound, and heard it die away in the wind, I felt a sudden
chillness spread itself over my body.  I shuddered without knowing
wherefore; Cold dews poured down my forehead, and my hair stood
bristling with alarm.  Suddenly I heard slow and heavy steps ascending
the staircase. By an involuntary movement I started up in my bed, and
drew back the curtain.  A single rush-light which glimmered upon the
hearth shed a faint gleam through the apartment, which was hung with
tapestry.  The door was thrown open with violence.  A figure entered,
and drew near my Bed with solemn measured steps.  With trembling
apprehension I examined this midnight Visitor.  God Almighty!  It was
the Bleeding Nun!  It was my lost Companion!  Her face was still
veiled, but She no longer held her Lamp and dagger.  She lifted up her
veil slowly.  What a sight presented itself to my startled eyes!  I
beheld before me an animated Corse.  Her countenance was long and
haggard; Her cheeks and lips were bloodless; The paleness of death was
spread over her features, and her eyeballs fixed stedfastly upon me
were lustreless and hollow.

I gazed upon the Spectre with horror too great to be described. My
blood was frozen in my veins.  I would have called for aid, but the
sound expired ere it could pass my lips.  My nerves were bound up in
impotence, and I remained in the same attitude inanimate as a Statue.

The visionary Nun looked upon me for some minutes in silence: There was
something petrifying in her regard. At length in a low sepulchral voice
She pronounced the following words.

      "Raymond!  Raymond!  Thou art mine!
       Raymond! Raymond!  I am thine!
       In thy veins while blood shall roll,
       I am thine!
       Thou art mine!
       Mine thy body! Mine thy soul!----"

Breathless with fear, I listened while She repeated my own expressions.
The Apparition seated herself opposite to me at the foot of the Bed,
and was silent.  Her eyes were fixed earnestly upon mine:  They seemed
endowed with the property of the Rattlesnake's, for I strove in vain to
look off her.  My eyes were fascinated, and I had not the power of
withdrawing them from the Spectre's.

In this attitude She remained for a whole long hour without speaking or
moving; nor was I able to do either.  At length the Clock struck two.
The Apparition rose from her seat, and approached the side of the bed.
She grasped with her icy fingers my hand which hung lifeless upon the
Coverture, and pressing her cold lips to mine, again repeated,

      "Raymond! Raymond! Thou art mine!
       Raymond! Raymond!
       I am thine! &c.----"

She then dropped my hand, quitted the chamber with slow steps, and the
Door closed after her.  Till that moment the faculties of my body had
been all suspended; Those of my mind had alone been waking.  The charm
now ceased to operate:  The blood which had been frozen in my veins
rushed back to my heart with violence: I uttered a deep groan, and sank
lifeless upon my pillow.

The adjoining room was only separated from mine by a thin partition:
It was occupied by the Host and his Wife:  The Former was rouzed by my
groan, and immediately hastened to my chamber: The Hostess soon
followed him.  With some difficulty they succeeded in restoring me to
my senses, and immediately sent for the Physician, who arrived in all
diligence.  He declared my fever to be very much increased, and that if
I continued to suffer such violent agitation, He would not take upon
him to ensure my life.  Some medicines which He gave me in some degree
tranquillized my spirits.  I fell into a sort of slumber towards
daybreak; But fearful dreams prevented me from deriving any benefit
from my repose.  Agnes and the Bleeding Nun presented themselves by
turns to my fancy, and combined to harass and torment me.  I awoke
fatigued and unrefreshed.  My fever seemed rather augmented than
diminished; The agitation of my mind impeded my fractured bones from
knitting:  I had frequent fainting fits, and during the whole day the
Physician judged it expedient not to quit me for two hours together.

The singularity of my adventure made me determine to conceal it from
every one, since I could not expect that a circumstance so strange
should gain credit.  I was very uneasy about Agnes.  I knew not what
She would think at not finding me at the rendezvous, and dreaded her
entertaining suspicions of my fidelity.  However, I depended upon
Theodore's discretion, and trusted that my letter to the Baroness would
convince her of the rectitude of my intentions.  These considerations
somewhat lightened my inquietude upon her account:  But the impression
left upon my mind by my nocturnal Visitor grew stronger with every
succeeding moment.  The night drew near; I dreaded its arrival.  Yet I
strove to persuade myself that the Ghost would appear no more, and at
all events I desired that a Servant might sit up in my chamber.

The fatigue of my body from not having slept on the former night,
co-operating with the strong opiates administered to me in profusion,
at length procured me that repose of which I was so much in need.  I
sank into a profound and tranquil slumber, and had already slept for
some hours, when the neighbouring Clock rouzed me by striking 'One'.
Its sound brought with it to my memory all the horrors of the night
before.  The same cold shivering seized me.  I started up in my bed,
and perceived the Servant fast asleep in an armed-Chair near me.  I
called him by his name:  He made no answer.  I shook him forcibly by
the arm, and strove in vain to wake him.  He was perfectly insensible
to my efforts.  I now heard the heavy steps ascending the staircase;
The Door was thrown open, and again the Bleeding Nun stood before me.
Once more my limbs were chained in second infancy.  Once more I heard
those fatal words repeated,

      "Raymond! Raymond!  Thou art mine!
       Raymond! Raymond!  I am thine! &c.----"

The scene which had shocked me so sensibly on the former night, was
again presented.  The Spectre again pressed her lips to mine, again
touched me with her rotting fingers, and as on her first appearance,
quitted the chamber as soon as the Clock told 'Two.'

Even night was this repeated.  Far from growing accustomed to the
Ghost, every succeeding visit inspired me with greater horror. Her idea
pursued me continually, and I became the prey of habitual melancholy.
The constant agitation of my mind naturally retarded the
re-establishment of my health.  Several months elapsed before I was
able to quit my bed; and when at length I was moved to a Sopha, I was
so faint, spiritless, and emaciated, that I could not cross the room
without assistance.  The looks of my Attendants sufficiently denoted
the little hope, which they entertained of my recovery.  The profound
sadness, which oppressed me without remission made the Physician
consider me to be an Hypochondriac.  The cause of my distress I
carefully concealed in my own bosom, for I knew that no one could give
me relief:  The Ghost was not even visible to any eye but mine.  I had
frequently caused Attendants to sit up in my room:  But the moment that
the Clock struck 'One,' irresistible slumber seized them, nor left them
till the departure of the Ghost.

You may be surprized that during this time I made no enquiries after
your Sister.  Theodore, who with difficulty had discovered my abode,
had quieted my apprehensions for her safety:  At the same time He
convinced me that all attempts to release her from captivity must be
fruitless till I should be in a condition to return to Spain.  The
particulars of her adventure which I shall now relate to you, were
partly communicated to me by Theodore, and partly by Agnes herself.

On the fatal night when her elopement was to have taken place, accident
had not permitted her to quit her chamber at the appointed time.  At
length She ventured into the haunted room, descended the staircase
leading into the Hall, found the Gates open as She expected, and left
the Castle unobserved.  What was her surprize at not finding me ready
to receive her!  She examined the Cavern, ranged through every Alley of
the neighbouring wood, and passed two full hours in this fruitless
enquiry. She could discover no traces either of me or of the Carriage.
Alarmed and disappointed, her only resource was to return to the Castle
before the Baroness missed her:  But here She found herself in a fresh
embarrassment. The Bell had already tolled 'Two:' The Ghostly hour was
past, and the careful Porter had locked the folding gates.  After much
irresolution She ventured to knock softly.  Luckily for her, Conrad was
still awake:  He heard the noise and rose, murmuring at being called up
a second time.  No sooner had He opened one of the Doors, and beheld
the supposed Apparition waiting there for admittance, than He uttered a
loud cry, and sank upon his knees.  Agnes profited by his terror.  She
glided by him, flew to her own apartment, and having thrown off her
Spectre's trappings, retired to bed endeavouring in vain to account for
my disappearing.

In the mean while Theodore having seen my Carriage drive off with the
false Agnes, returned joyfully to the Village.  The next morning He
released Cunegonda from her confinement, and accompanied her to the
Castle.  There He found the Baron, his Lady, and Don Gaston, disputing
together upon the Porter's relation.  All of them agreed in believing
the existence of Spectres:  But the Latter contended, that for a Ghost
to knock for admittance was a proceeding till then unwitnessed, and
totally incompatible with the immaterial nature of a Spirit. They were
still discussing this subject when the Page appeared with Cunegonda and
cleared up the mystery.  On hearing his deposition, it was agreed
unanimously that the Agnes whom Theodore had seen step into my Carriage
must have been the Bleeding Nun, and that the Ghost who had terrified
Conrad was no other than Don Gaston's Daughter.

The first surprize which this discovery occasioned being over, the
Baroness resolved to make it of use in persuading her Niece to take the
veil.  Fearing lest so advantageous an establishment for his Daughter
should induce Don Gaston to renounce his resolution, She suppressed my
letter, and continued to represent me as a needy unknown Adventurer.  A
childish vanity had led me to conceal my real name even from my
Mistress; I wished to be loved for myself, not for being the Son and
Heir of the Marquis de las Cisternas.  The consequence was that my rank
was known to no one in the Castle except the Baroness, and She took
good care to confine the knowledge to her own breast.  Don Gaston
having approved his Sister's design, Agnes was summoned to appear
before them.  She was taxed with having meditated an elopement, obliged
to make a full confession, and was amazed at the gentleness with which
it was received:  But what was her affliction, when informed that the
failure of her project must be attributed to me!  Cunegonda, tutored by
the Baroness, told her that when I released her, I had desired her to
inform her Lady that our connexion was at an end, that the whole affair
was occasioned by a false report, and that it by no means suited my
circumstances to marry a Woman without fortune or expectations.

To this account my sudden disappearing gave but too great an air of
probability.  Theodore, who could have contradicted the story, by Donna
Rodolpha's order was kept out of her sight:  What proved a still
greater confirmation of my being an Impostor, was the arrival of a
letter from yourself declaring that you had no sort of acquaintance
with Alphonso d'Alvarada.  These seeming proofs of my perfidy, aided by
the artful insinuations of her Aunt, by Cunegonda's flattery, and her
Father's threats and anger, entirely conquered your Sister's repugnance
to a Convent. Incensed at my behaviour, and disgusted with the world in
general, She consented to receive the veil.  She past another Month at
the Castle of Lindenberg, during which my non-appearance confirmed her
in her resolution, and then accompanied Don Gaston into Spain.
Theodore was now set at liberty.  He hastened to Munich, where I had
promised to let him hear from me; But finding from Lucas that I had
never arrived there, He pursued his search with indefatigable
perseverance, and at length succeeded in rejoining me at Ratisbon.

So much was I altered, that scarcely could He recollect my features:
The distress visible upon his sufficiently testified how lively was the
interest which He felt for me.  The society of this amiable Boy, whom I
had always considered rather as a Companion than a Servant, was now my
only comfort.  His conversation was gay yet sensible, and his
observations shrewd and entertaining: He had picked up much more
knowledge than is usual at his Age:  But what rendered him most
agreeable to me, was his having a delightful voice, and some skill in
Music.  He had also acquired some taste in poetry, and even ventured
sometimes to write verses himself.  He occasionally composed little
Ballads in Spanish, his compositions were but indifferent, I must
confess; yet they were pleasing to me from their novelty, and hearing
him sing them to his guitar was the only amusement, which I was capable
of receiving.  Theodore perceived well enough that something preyed
upon my mind; But as I concealed the cause of my grief even from him,
Respect would not permit him to pry into my secrets.

One Evening I was lying upon my Sopha, plunged in reflections very far
from agreeable:  Theodore amused himself by observing from the window a
Battle between two Postillions, who were quarrelling in the Inn-yard.

'Ha! Ha!' cried He suddenly; 'Yonder is the Great Mogul.'

'Who?' said I.

'Only a Man who made me a strange speech at Munich.'

'What was the purport of it?'

'Now you put me in mind of it, Segnor, it was a kind of message to you;
but truly it was not worth delivering.  I believe the Fellow to be mad,
for my part.  When I came to Munich in search of you, I found him
living at 'The King of the Romans,' and the Host gave me an odd account
of him.  By his accent He is supposed to be a Foreigner, but of what
Country nobody can tell.  He seemed to have no acquaintance in the
Town, spoke very seldom, and never was seen to smile.  He had neither
Servants or Baggage; But his Purse seemed well-furnished, and He did
much good in the Town.  Some supposed him to be an Arabian Astrologer,
Others to be a Travelling Mountebank, and many declared that He was
Doctor Faustus, whom the Devil had sent back to Germany.  The Landlord,
however told me, that He had the best reasons to believe him to be the
Great Mogul incognito.'

'But the strange speech, Theodore.'

'True, I had almost forgotten the speech:  Indeed for that matter, it
would not have been a great loss if I had forgotten it altogether.  You
are to know, Segnor, that while I was enquiring about you of the
Landlord, this Stranger passed by.  He stopped, and looked at me
earnestly. 'Youth!' said He in a solemn voice, 'He whom you seek, has
found that which He would fain lose.  My hand alone can dry up the
blood:  Bid your Master wish for me when the Clock strikes, 'One.'

'How?' cried I, starting from my Sopha.  (The words which Theodore had
repeated, seemed to imply the Stranger's knowledge of my secret) 'Fly
to him, my Boy!  Entreat him to grant me one moment's conversation!'

Theodore was surprised at the vivacity of my manner: However, He asked
no questions, but hastened to obey me.  I waited his return
impatiently.  But a short space of time had elapsed when He again
appeared and ushered the expected Guest into my chamber.  He was a Man
of majestic presence:  His countenance was strongly marked, and his
eyes were large, black, and sparkling:  Yet there was a something in
his look which, the moment that I saw him, inspired me with a secret
awe, not to say horror.  He was drest plainly, his hair was unpowdered,
and a band of black velvet which encircled his forehead spread over his
features an additional gloom.  His countenance wore the marks of
profound melancholy; his step was slow, and his manner grave, stately,
and solemn.

He saluted me with politeness; and having replied to the usual
compliments of introduction, He motioned to Theodore to quit the
chamber.  The Page instantly withdrew.

'I know your business,' said He, without giving me time to speak.

'I have the power of releasing you from your nightly Visitor; But this
cannot be done before Sunday.  On the hour when the Sabbath Morning
breaks, Spirits of darkness have least influence over Mortals.  After
Saturday the Nun shall visit you no more.'

'May I not enquire,' said I, 'by what means you are in possession of a
secret which I have carefully concealed from the knowledge of everyone?'

'How can I be ignorant of your distress, when their cause at this
moment stands beside you?'

I started.  The Stranger continued.

'Though to you only visible for one hour in the twenty-four, neither
day or night does She ever quit you; Nor will She ever quit you till
you have granted her request.'

'And what is that request?'

'That She must herself explain:  It lies not in my knowledge. Wait with
patience for the night of Saturday: All shall be then cleared up.'

I dared not press him further.  He soon after changed the conversation
and talked of various matters.  He named People who had ceased to exist
for many Centuries, and yet with whom He appeared to have been
personally acquainted.  I could not mention a Country however distant
which He had not visited, nor could I sufficiently admire the extent
and variety of his information. I remarked to him that having
travelled, seen, and known so much, must have given him infinite
pleasure.  He shook his head mournfully.

'No one,' He replied, 'is adequate to comprehending the misery of my
lot!  Fate obliges me to be constantly in movement:  I am not permitted
to pass more than a fortnight in the same place.  I have no Friend in
the world, and from the restlessness of my destiny I never can acquire
one.  Fain would I lay down my miserable life, for I envy those who
enjoy the quiet of the Grave: But Death eludes me, and flies from my
embrace.  In vain do I throw myself in the way of danger.  I plunge
into the Ocean; The Waves throw me back with abhorrence upon the shore:
I rush into fire; The flames recoil at my approach:  I oppose myself to
the fury of Banditti; Their swords become blunted, and break against my
breast:  The hungry Tiger shudders at my approach, and the Alligator
flies from a Monster more horrible than itself. God has set his seal
upon me, and all his Creatures respect this fatal mark!'

He put his hand to the velvet, which was bound round his forehead.
There was in his eyes an expression of fury, despair, and malevolence,
that struck horror to my very soul.  An involuntary convulsion made me
shudder.  The Stranger perceived it.

'Such is the curse imposed on me,' he continued:  'I am doomed to
inspire all who look on me with terror and detestation.  You already
feel the influence of the charm, and with every succeeding moment will
feel it more.  I will not add to your sufferings by my presence.
Farewell till Saturday.  As soon as the Clock strikes twelve, expect me
at your chamber door.'

Having said this He departed, leaving me in astonishment at the
mysterious turn of his manner and conversation.

His assurances that I should soon be relieved from the Apparition's
visits produced a good effect upon my constitution. Theodore, whom I
rather treated as an adopted Child than a Domestic, was surprized at
his return to observe the amendment in my looks.  He congratulated me
on this symptom of returning health, and declared himself delighted at
my having received so much benefit from my conference with the Great
Mogul.  Upon enquiry I found that the Stranger had already past eight
days in Ratisbon:  According to his own account, therefore, He was only
to remain there six days longer.  Saturday was still at the distance of
Three.  Oh! with what impatience did I expect its arrival!  In the
interim, the Bleeding Nun continued her nocturnal visits; But hoping
soon to be released from them altogether, the effects which they
produced on me became less violent than before.

The wished-for night arrived.  To avoid creating suspicion I retired to
bed at my usual hour:  But as soon as my Attendants had left me, I
dressed myself again, and prepared for the Stranger's reception.  He
entered my room upon the turn of midnight.  A small Chest was in his
hand, which He placed near the Stove.  He saluted me without speaking;
I returned the compliment, observing an equal silence.  He then opened
his Chest.  The first thing which He produced was a small wooden
Crucifix: He sank upon his knees, gazed upon it mournfully, and cast
his eyes towards heaven.  He seemed to be praying devoutly. At length
He bowed his head respectfully, kissed the Crucifix thrice, and quitted
his kneeling posture.  He next drew from the Chest a covered Goblet:
With the liquor which it contained, and which appeared to be blood, He
sprinkled the floor, and then dipping in it one end of the Crucifix, He
described a circle in the middle of the room.  Round about this He
placed various reliques, sculls, thigh-bones &c; I observed, that He
disposed them all in the forms of Crosses.  Lastly He took out a large
Bible, and beckoned me to follow him into the Circle.  I obeyed.

'Be cautious not to utter a syllable!' whispered the Stranger; 'Step
not out of the circle, and as you love yourself, dare not to look upon
my face!'

Holding the Crucifix in one hand, the Bible in the other, He seemed to
read with profound attention.  The Clock struck 'One'! As usual I heard
the Spectre's steps upon the Staircase:  But I was not seized with the
accustomed shivering.  I waited her approach with confidence.  She
entered the room, drew near the Circle, and stopped.  The Stranger
muttered some words, to me unintelligible.  Then raising his head from
the Book, and extending the Crucifix towards the Ghost, He pronounced
in a voice distinct and solemn,

'Beatrice!  Beatrice!  Beatrice!'

'What wouldst Thou?' replied the Apparition in a hollow faltering tone.

'What disturbs thy sleep?  Why dost thou afflict and torture this
Youth?  How can rest be restored to thy unquiet Spirit?'

'I dare not tell!--I must not tell!--Fain would I repose in my Grave,
but stern commands force me to prolong my punishment!'

'Knowest Thou this blood?  Knowest Thou in whose veins it flowed?

Beatrice! Beatrice! In his name I charge thee to answer me!'

'I dare not disobey my taskers.'

'Darest Thou disobey Me?'

He spoke in a commanding tone, and drew the sable band from his
forehead.  In spite of his injunctions to the contrary, Curiosity would
not suffer me to keep my eyes off his face:  I raised them, and beheld
a burning Cross impressed upon his brow. For the horror with which this
object inspired me I cannot account, but I never felt its equal!  My
senses left me for some moments; A mysterious dread overcame my
courage, and had not the Exorciser caught my hand, I should have fallen
out of the Circle.

When I recovered myself, I perceived that the burning Cross had
produced an effect no less violent upon the Spectre.  Her countenance
expressed reverence, and horror, and her visionary limbs were shaken by
fear.

'Yes!' She said at length; 'I tremble at that mark!--respect it!--I
obey you!  Know then, that my bones lie still unburied: They rot in the
obscurity of Lindenberg Hole.  None but this Youth has the right of
consigning them to the Grave.  His own lips have made over to me his
body and his soul:  Never will I give back his promise, never shall He
know a night devoid of terror, unless He engages to collect my
mouldering bones, and deposit them in the family vault of his
Andalusian Castle.  Then let thirty Masses be said for the repose of my
Spirit, and I trouble this world no more.  Now let me depart!  Those
flames are scorching!'

He let the hand drop slowly which held the Crucifix, and which till
then He had pointed towards her.  The apparition bowed her head, and
her form melted into air.  The Exorciser led me out of the Circle.  He
replaced the Bible &c.  in the Chest, and then addressed himself to me,
who stood near him speechless from astonishment.

'Don Raymond, you have heard the conditions on which repose is promised
you.  Be it your business to fulfil them to the letter. For me nothing
more remains than to clear up the darkness still spread over the
Spectre's History, and inform you that when living, Beatrice bore the
name of las Cisternas.  She was the great Aunt of your Grandfather:  In
quality of your relation, her ashes demand respect from you, though the
enormity of her crimes must excite your abhorrence.  The nature of
those crimes no one is more capable of explaining to you than myself:
I was personally acquainted with the holy Man who proscribed her
nocturnal riots in the Castle of Lindenberg, and I hold this narrative
from his own lips.

'Beatrice de las Cisternas took the veil at an early age, not by her
own choice, but at the express command of her Parents.  She was then
too young to regret the pleasures of which her profession deprived her:
But no sooner did her warm and voluptuous character begin to be
developed than She abandoned herself freely to the impulse of her
passions, and seized the first opportunity to procure their
gratification.  This opportunity was at length presented, after many
obstacles which only added new force to her desires.  She contrived to
elope from the Convent, and fled to Germany with the Baron Lindenberg.
She lived at his Castle several months as his avowed Concubine:  All
Bavaria was scandalized by her impudent and abandoned conduct. Her
feasts vied in luxury with Cleopatra's, and Lindenberg became the
Theatre of the most unbridled debauchery.  Not satisfied with
displaying the incontinence of a Prostitute, She professed herself an
Atheist:  She took every opportunity  to scoff at her monastic vows,
and loaded with ridicule the most sacred ceremonies of Religion.

'Possessed of a character so depraved, She did not long confine her
affections to one object.  Soon after her arrival at the Castle, the
Baron's younger Brother attracted her notice by his strong-marked
features, gigantic Stature, and Herculean limbs. She was not of an
humour to keep her inclinations long unknown; But She found in Otto von
Lindenberg her equal in depravity.  He returned her passion just
sufficiently to increase it; and when He had worked it up to the
desired pitch, He fixed the price of his love at his Brother's murder.
The Wretch consented to this horrible agreement.  A night was pitched
upon for perpetrating the deed.  Otto, who resided on a small Estate a
few miles distant from the Castle, promised that at One in the morning
He would be waiting for her at Lindenberg Hole; that He would bring
with him a party of chosen Friends, by whose aid He doubted not being
able to make himself Master of the Castle; and that his next step
should be the uniting her hand to his.  It was this last promise, which
overruled every scruple of Beatrice, since in spite of his affection
for her, the Baron had declared positively that He never would make her
his Wife.

'The fatal night arrived.  The Baron slept in the arms of his
perfidious Mistress, when the Castle-Bell struck 'One.' Immediately
Beatrice drew a dagger from underneath the pillow, and plunged it in
her Paramour's heart.  The Baron uttered a single dreadful groan, and
expired.  The Murderess quitted her bed hastily, took a Lamp in one
hand, in the other the bloody dagger, and bent her course towards the
cavern.  The Porter dared not to refuse opening the Gates to one more
dreaded in the Castle than its Master.  Beatrice reached Lindenberg
Hole unopposed, where according to promise She found Otto waiting for
her.  He received and listened to her narrative with transport: But ere
She had time to ask why He came unaccompanied, He convinced her that He
wished for no witnesses to their interview. Anxious to conceal his
share in the murder, and to free himself from a Woman, whose violent
and atrocious character made him tremble with reason for his own
safety, He had resolved on the destruction of his wretched Agent.
Rushing upon her suddenly, He wrested the dagger from her hand:  He
plunged it still reeking with his Brother's blood in her bosom, and put
an end to her existence by repeated blows.

'Otto now succeeded to the Barony of Lindenberg.  The murder was
attributed solely to the fugitive Nun, and no one suspected him to have
persuaded her to the action.  But though his crime was unpunished by
Man, God's justice permitted him not to enjoy in peace his
blood-stained honours.  Her bones lying still unburied in the Cave, the
restless soul of Beatrice continued to inhabit the Castle.  Drest in
her religious habit in memory of her vows broken to heaven, furnished
with the dagger which had drank the blood of her Paramour, and holding
the Lamp which had guided her flying steps, every night did She stand
before the Bed of Otto. The most dreadful confusion reigned through the
Castle; The vaulted chambers resounded with shrieks and groans; And the
Spectre, as She ranged along the antique Galleries, uttered an
incoherent mixture of prayers and blasphemies.  Otto was unable to
withstand the shock which He felt at this fearful Vision: Its horror
increased with every succeeding appearance:  His alarm at length became
so insupportable that his heart burst, and one morning He was found in
his bed totally deprived of warmth and animation.  His death did not
put an end to the nocturnal riots. The bones of Beatrice continued to
lie unburied, and her Ghost continued to haunt the Castle.

'The domains of Lindenberg now fell to a distant Relation.  But
terrified by the accounts given him of the Bleeding Nun (So was the
Spectre called by the multitude), the new Baron called to his
assistance a celebrated Exorciser.  This holy Man succeeded in obliging
her to temporary repose; But though She discovered to him her history,
He was not permitted to reveal it to others, or cause her skeleton to
be removed to hallowed ground.  That Office was reserved for you, and
till your coming, her Ghost was doomed to wander about the Castle and
lament the crime which She had there committed.  However, the Exorciser
obliged her to silence during his lifetime.  So long as He existed, the
haunted chamber was shut up, and the Spectre was invisible.  At his
death which happened in five years after, She again appeared, but only
once on every fifth year, on the same day and at the same hour when She
plunged her Knife in the heart of her sleeping Lover:  She then visited
the Cavern which held her mouldering skeleton, returned to the Castle
as soon as the Clock struck 'Two,' and was seen no more till the next
five years had elapsed.

'She was doomed to suffer during the space of a Century.  That period
is past.  Nothing now remains but to consign to the Grave the ashes of
Beatrice.  I have been the means of releasing you from your visionary
Tormentor; and amidst all the sorrows which oppress me, to think that I
have been of use to you, is some consolation.  Youth, farewell!  May
the Ghost of your Relation enjoy that rest in the Tomb, which the
Almighty's vengeance has denied to me for ever!'

Here the Stranger prepared to quit the apartment.

'Stay yet one moment!' said I; 'You have satisfied my curiosity with
regard to the Spectre, but you leave me in prey to yet greater
respecting yourself.  Deign to inform me, to whom I am under such real
obligations.  You mention circumstances long past, and persons long
dead:  You were personally acquainted with the Exorciser, who by your
own account has been deceased near a Century.  How am I to account for
this?  What means that burning Cross upon your forehead, and why did
the sight of it strike such horror to my soul?'

On these points He for some time refused to satisfy me.  At length
overcome by my entreaties, He consented to clear up the whole, on
condition that I would defer his explanation till the next day.  With
this request I was obliged to comply, and He left me.  In the Morning
my first care was to enquire after the mysterious Stranger.  Conceive
my disappointment when informed that He had already quitted Ratisbon.
I dispatched messengers in pursuit of him but in vain.  No traces of
the Fugitive were discovered.  Since that moment I never have heard any
more of him, and 'tis most probable that I never shall.'

(Lorenzo here interrupted his Friend's narrative.

'How?' said He; 'You have never discovered who He was, or even formed a
guess?'

'Pardon me,' replied the Marquis; 'When I related this adventure to my
Uncle, the Cardinal-Duke, He told me that He had no doubt of this
singular Man's being the celebrated Character known universally by the
name of 'the wandering Jew.'  His not being permitted to pass more than
fourteen days on the same spot, the burning Cross impressed upon his
forehead, the effect which it produced upon the Beholders, and many
other circumstances give this supposition the colour of truth.  The
Cardinal is fully persuaded of it; and for my own part I am inclined to
adopt the only solution which offers itself to this riddle.  I return
to the narrative from which I have digressed.')

From this period I recovered my health so rapidly as to astonish my
Physicians.  The Bleeding Nun appeared no more, and I was soon able to
set out for Lindenberg.  The Baron received me with open arms.  I
confided to him the sequel of my adventure; and He was not a little
pleased to find that his Mansion would be no longer troubled with the
Phantom's quiennial visits.  I was sorry to perceive that absence had
not weakened Donna Rodolpha's imprudent passion.  In a private
conversation which I had with her during my short stay at the Castle,
She renewed her attempts to persuade me to return her affection.
Regarding her as the primary cause of all my sufferings, I entertained
for her no other sentiment than disgust.  The Skeleton of Beatrice was
found in the place which She had mentioned.  This being all that I
sought at Lindenberg, I hastened to quit the Baron's domains, equally
anxious to perform the obsequies of the murdered Nun, and escape the
importunity of a Woman whom I detested.  I departed, followed by Donna
Rodolpha's menaces that my contempt should not be long unpunished.

I now bent my course towards Spain with all diligence.  Lucas with my
Baggage had joined me during my abode at Lindenberg.  I arrived in my
native Country without any accident, and immediately proceeded to my
Father's Castle in Andalusia.  The remains of Beatrice were deposited
in the family vault, all due ceremonies performed, and the number of
Masses said which She had required.  Nothing now hindered me from
employing all my endeavours to discover the retreat of Agnes.  The
Baroness had assured me that her Niece had already taken the veil:
This intelligence I suspected to have been forged by jealousy, and
hoped to find my Mistress still at liberty to accept my hand.  I
enquired after her family; I found that before her Daughter could reach
Madrid, Donna Inesilla was no more:  You, my dear Lorenzo, were said to
be abroad, but where I could not discover:  Your Father was in a
distant Province on a visit to the Duke de Medina, and as to Agnes, no
one could or would inform me what was become of her.  Theodore,
according to promise, had returned to Strasbourg, where He found his
Grandfather dead, and Marguerite in possession of his fortune.  All her
persuasions to remain with her were fruitless:  He quitted her a second
time, and followed me to Madrid.  He exerted himself to the utmost in
forwarding my search: But our united endeavours were unattended by
success. The retreat which concealed Agnes remained an impenetrable
mystery, and I began to abandon all hopes of recovering her.

About eight months ago I was returning to my Hotel in a melancholy
humour, having past the evening at the Play-House. The Night was dark,
and I was unaccompanied.  Plunged in reflections which were far from
being agreeable, I perceived not that three Men had followed me from
the Theatre; till, on turning into an unfrequented Street, they all
attacked me at the same time with the utmost fury.  I sprang back a few
paces, drew my sword, and threw my cloak over my left arm.  The
obscurity of the night was in my favour.  For the most part the blows
of the Assassins, being aimed at random, failed to touch me.  I at
length was fortunate enough to lay one of my Adversaries at my feet;
But before this I had already received so many wounds, and was so
warmly pressed, that my destruction would have been inevitable, had not
the clashing of swords called a Cavalier to my assistance.  He ran
towards me with his sword drawn:  Several Domestics followed him with
torches.  His arrival made the combat equal:  Yet would not the Bravoes
abandon their design till the Servants were on the point of joining us.
They then fled away, and we lost them in the obscurity.

The Stranger now addressed himself to me with politeness, and enquired
whether I was wounded.  Faint with the loss of blood, I could scarcely
thank him for his seasonable aid, and entreat him to let some of his
Servants convey me to the Hotel de las Cisternas.  I no sooner
mentioned the name than He profest himself an acquaintance of my
Father's, and declared that He would not permit my being transported to
such a distance before my wounds had been examined.  He added that his
House was hard by, and begged me to accompany him thither.  His manner
was so earnest, that I could not reject his offer, and leaning upon his
arm, a few minutes brought me to the Porch of a magnificent Hotel.

On entering the House, an old grey-headed Domestic came to welcome my
Conductor:  He enquired when the Duke, his Master, meant to quit the
Country, and was answered that He would remain there yet some months.
My Deliverer then desired the family Surgeon to be summoned without
delay.  His orders were obeyed.  I was seated upon a Sopha in a noble
apartment; and my wounds being examined, they were declared to be very
slight.  The Surgeon, however, advised me not to expose myself to the
night air; and the Stranger pressed me so earnestly to take a bed in
his House, that I consented to remain where I was for the present.

Being now left alone with my Deliverer, I took the opportunity of
thanking him in more express terms, than I had done hitherto: But He
begged me to be silent upon the subject.

'I esteem myself happy,' said He, 'in having had it in my power to
render you this little service; and I shall think myself eternally
obliged to my Daughter for detaining me so late at the Convent of St.
Clare.  The high esteem in which I have ever held the Marquis de las
Cisternas, though accident has not permitted our being so intimate as I
could wish, makes me rejoice in the opportunity of making his Son's
acquaintance.  I am certain that my Brother in whose House you now are,
will lament his not being at Madrid to receive you himself: But in the
Duke's absence I am Master of the family, and may assure you in his
name, that every thing in the Hotel de Medina is perfectly at your
disposal.'

Conceive my surprize, Lorenzo, at discovering in the person of my
Preserver Don Gaston de Medina:  It was only to be equalled by my
secret satisfaction at the assurance that Agnes inhabited the Convent
of St. Clare.  This latter sensation was not a little weakened, when in
answer to my seemingly indifferent questions He told me that his
Daughter had really taken the veil.  I suffered not my grief at this
circumstance to take root in my mind:  I flattered myself with the idea
that my Uncle's credit at the Court of Rome would remove this obstacle,
and that without difficulty I should obtain for my Mistress a
dispensation from her vows.  Buoyed up with this hope I calmed the
uneasiness of my bosom; and I redoubled my endeavours to appear
grateful for the attention and pleased with the society of Don Gaston.

A Domestic now entered the room, and informed me that the Bravo whom I
had wounded discovered some signs of life.  I desired that He might be
carried to my Father's Hotel, and that as soon as He recovered his
voice, I would examine him respecting his reasons for attempting my
life.  I was answered that He was already able to speak, though with
difficulty:  Don Gaston's curiosity made him press me to interrogate
the Assassin in his presence, but this curiosity I was by no means
inclined to gratify.  One reason was, that doubting from whence the
blow came, I was unwilling to place before Don Gaston's eyes the guilt
of a Sister:  Another was, that I feared to be recognized for Alphonso
d'Alvarada, and precautions taken in consequence to keep me from the
sight of Agnes.  To avow my passion for his Daughter, and endeavour to
make him enter into my schemes, what I knew of Don Gaston's character
convinced me would be an imprudent step: and considering it to be
essential that He should know me for no other than the Conde de las
Cisternas, I was determined not to let him hear the Bravo's confession.
I insinuated to him, that as I suspected a Lady to be concerned in the
Business, whose name might accidentally escape from the Assassin, it
was necessary for me to examine the Man in private.  Don Gaston's
delicacy would not permit his urging the point any longer, and in
consequence the Bravo was conveyed to my Hotel.

The next Morning I took leave of my Host, who was to return to the Duke
on the same day.  My wounds had been so trifling that, except being
obliged to wear my arm in a sling for a short time, I felt no
inconvenience from the night's adventure.  The Surgeon who examined the
Bravo's wound declared it to be mortal:  He had just time to confess
that He had been instigated to murder me by the revengeful Donna
Rodolpha, and expired in a few minutes after.

All my thoughts were now bent upon getting to the speech of my lovely
Nun.  Theodore set himself to work, and for this time with better
success.  He attacked the Gardener of St. Clare so forcibly with bribes
and promises that the Old Man was entirely gained over to my interests;
and it was settled that I should be introduced into the Convent in the
character of his Assistant. The plan was put into execution without
delay.  Disguised in a common habit, and a black patch covering one of
my eyes, I was presented to the Lady Prioress, who condescended to
approve of the Gardener's choice.  I immediately entered upon my
employment. Botany having been a favourite study with me, I was by no
means at a loss in my new station.  For some days I continued to work
in the Convent Garden without meeting the Object of my disguise: On the
fourth Morning I was more successful.  I heard the voice of Agnes, and
was speeding towards the sound, when the sight of the Domina stopped
me.  I drew back with caution, and concealed myself behind a thick
clump of Trees.

The Prioress advanced and seated herself with Agnes on a Bench at no
great distance.  I heard her in an angry tone blame her Companion's
continual melancholy: She told her that to weep the loss of any Lover
in her situation was a crime; But that to weep the loss of a faithless
one was folly and absurdity in the extreme.  Agnes replied in so low a
voice that I could not distinguish her words, but I perceived that She
used terms of gentleness and submission.  The conversation was
interrupted by the arrival of a young Pensioner who informed the Domina
that She was waited for in the Parlour.  The old Lady rose, kissed the
cheek of Agnes, and retired.  The newcomer remained.  Agnes spoke much
to her in praise of somebody whom I could not make out, but her Auditor
seemed highly delighted, and interested by the conversation.  The Nun
showed her several letters; the Other perused them with evident
pleasure, obtained permission to copy them, and withdrew for that
purpose to my great satisfaction.

No sooner was She out of sight, than I quitted my concealment. Fearing
to alarm my lovely Mistress, I drew near her gently, intending to
discover myself by degrees.  But who for a moment can deceive the eyes
of love?  She raised her head at my approach, and recognised me in
spite of my disguise at a single glance.  She rose hastily from her
seat with an exclamation of surprize, and attempted to retire; But I
followed her, detained her, and entreated to be heard.  Persuaded of my
falsehood She refused to listen to me, and ordered me positively to
quit the Garden.  It was now my turn to refuse.  I protested that
however dangerous might be the consequences, I would not leave her till
She had heard my justification.  I assured her that She had been
deceived by the artifices of her Relations; that I could convince her
beyond the power of doubt that my passion had been pure and
disinterested; and I asked her what should induce me to seek her in the
Convent, were I influenced by the selfish motives which my Enemies had
ascribed to me.

My prayers, my arguments, and vows not to quit her, till She had
promised to listen to me, united to her fears lest the Nuns should see
me with her, to her natural curiosity, and to the affection which She
still felt for me in spite of my supposed desertion, at length
prevailed. She told me that to grant my request at that moment was
impossible; But She engaged to be in the same spot at eleven that
night, and to converse with me for the last time.  Having obtained this
promise I released her hand, and She fled back with rapidity towards
the Convent.

I communicated my success to my Ally, the old Gardener:  He pointed out
an hiding place where I might shelter myself till night without fear of
a discovery.  Thither I betook myself at the hour when I ought to have
retired with my supposed Master, and waited impatiently for the
appointed time.  The chillness of the night was in my favour, since it
kept the other Nuns confined to their Cells.  Agnes alone was
insensible of the inclemency of the Air, and before eleven joined me at
the spot which had witnessed our former interview.  Secure from
interruption, I related to her the true cause of my disappearing on the
fatal fifth of May.  She was evidently much affected by my narrative:
When it was concluded, She confessed the injustice of her suspicions,
and blamed herself for having taken the veil through despair at my
ingratitude.

'But now it is too late to repine!' She added; 'The die is thrown:  I
have pronounced my vows, and dedicated myself to the service of heaven.
I am sensible, how ill I am calculated for a Convent.  My disgust at a
monastic life increases daily:  Ennui and discontent are my constant
Companions; and I will not conceal from you that the passion which I
formerly felt for one so near being my Husband is not yet extinguished
in my bosom.  But we must part!  Insuperable Barriers divide us from
each other, and on this side the Grave we must never meet again!'

I now exerted myself to prove that our union was not so impossible as
She seemed to think it.  I vaunted to her the Cardinal-Duke of Lerma's
influence at the Court of Rome:  I assured her that I should easily
obtain a dispensation from her vows; and I doubted not but Don Gaston
would coincide with my views, when informed of my real name and long
attachment.  Agnes replied that since I encouraged such an hope, I
could know but little of her Father.  Liberal and kind in every other
respect, Superstition formed the only stain upon his character.  Upon
this head He was inflexible; He sacrificed his dearest interests to his
scruples, and would consider it an insult to suppose him capable of
authorising his daughter to break her vows to heaven.

'But suppose,' said I interrupting her; 'Suppose that He should
disapprove of our union; Let him remain ignorant of my proceedings,
till I have rescued you from the prison in which you are now confined.
Once my Wife, you are free from his authority:  I need from him no
pecuniary assistance; and when He sees his resentment to be unavailing,
He will doubtless restore you to his favour.  But let the worst happen;
Should Don Gaston be irreconcileable, my Relations will vie with each
other in making you forget his loss: and you will find in my Father a
substitute for the Parent of whom I shall deprive you.'

'Don Raymond,' replied Agnes in a firm and resolute voice, 'I love my
Father:  He has treated me harshly in this one instance; but I have
received from him in every other so many proofs of love that his
affection is become necessary to my existence. Were I to quit the
Convent, He never would forgive me; nor can I think that on his
deathbed He would leave me his curse, without shuddering at the very
idea.  Besides, I am conscious myself, that my vows are binding:
Wilfully did I contract my engagement with heaven; I cannot break it
without a crime.  Then banish from your mind the idea of our being ever
united.  I am devoted to religion; and however I may grieve at our
separation, I would oppose obstacles myself, to what I feel would
render me guilty.'

I strove to overrule these ill-grounded scruples:  We were still
disputing upon the subject, when the Convent Bell summoned the Nuns to
Matins.  Agnes was obliged to attend them; But She left me not till I
had compelled her to promise that on the following night She would be
at the same place at the same hour.  These meetings continued for
several Weeks uninterrupted; and 'tis now, Lorenzo, that I must implore
your indulgence.  Reflect upon our situation, our youth, our long
attachment: Weigh all the circumstances which attended our
assignations, and you will confess the temptation to have been
irresistible; you will even pardon me when I acknowledge, that in an
unguarded moment, the honour of Agnes was sacrificed to my passion.'

(Lorenzo's eyes sparkled with fury:  A deep crimson spread itself over
his face.  He started from his seat, and attempted to draw his sword.
The Marquis was aware of his movement, and caught his hand:  He pressed
it affectionately.

'My Friend! My Brother! Hear me to the conclusion!  Till then restrain
your passion, and be at least convinced, that if what I have related is
criminal, the blame must fall upon me, and not upon your Sister.'

Lorenzo suffered himself to be prevailed upon by Don Raymond's
entreaties.  He resumed his place, and listened to the rest of the
narrative with a gloomy and impatient countenance.  The Marquis thus
continued.)

'Scarcely was the first burst of passion past when Agnes, recovering
herself, started from my arms with horror.  She called me infamous
Seducer, loaded me with the bitterest reproaches, and beat her bosom in
all the wildness of delirium.  Ashamed of my imprudence, I with
difficulty found words to excuse myself.  I endeavoured to console her;
I threw myself at her feet, and entreated her forgiveness.  She forced
her hand from me, which I had taken, and would have prest to my lips.

'Touch me not!' She cried with a violence which terrified me; 'Monster
of perfidy and ingratitude, how have I been deceived in you!  I looked
upon you as my Friend, my Protector:  I trusted myself in your hands
with confidence, and relying upon your honour, thought that mine ran no
risque.  And 'tis by you, whom I adored, that I am covered with infamy!
'Tis by you that I have been seduced into breaking my vows to God, that
I am reduced to a level with the basest of my sex!  Shame upon you,
Villain, you shall never see me more!'

She started from the Bank on which She was seated.  I endeavoured to
detain her; But She disengaged herself from me with violence, and took
refuge in the Convent.

I retired, filled with confusion and inquietude.  The next morning I
failed not as usual to appear in the Garden; but Agnes was no where to
be seen.  At night I waited for her at the place where we generally
met; I found no better success.  Several days and nights passed away in
the same manner.  At length I saw my offended Mistress cross the walk
on whose borders I was working: She was accompanied by the same young
Pensioner, on whose arm She seemed from weakness obliged to support
herself.  She looked upon me for a moment, but instantly turned her
head away.  I waited her return; But She passed on to the Convent
without paying any attention to me, or the penitent looks with which I
implored her forgiveness.

As soon as the Nuns were retired, the old Gardener joined me with a
sorrowful air.

'Segnor,' said He, 'it grieves me to say, that I can be no longer of
use to you.  The Lady whom you used to meet has just assured me that if
I admitted you again into the Garden, She would discover the whole
business to the Lady Prioress.  She bade me tell you also, that your
presence was an insult, and that if you still possess the least respect
for her, you will never attempt to see her more.  Excuse me then for
informing you that I can favour your disguise no longer.  Should the
Prioress be acquainted with my conduct, She might not be contented with
dismissing me her service:  Out of revenge She might accuse me of
having profaned the Convent, and cause me to be thrown into the Prisons
of the Inquisition.'

Fruitless were my attempts to conquer his resolution.  He denied me all
future entrance into the Garden, and Agnes persevered in neither
letting me see or hear from her.  In about a fortnight after, a violent
illness which had seized my Father obliged me to set out for Andalusia.
I hastened thither, and as I imagined, found the Marquis at the point
of death.  Though on its first appearance his complaint was declared
mortal, He lingered out several Months; during which my attendance upon
him during his malady, and the occupation of settling his affairs after
his decease, permitted not my quitting Andalusia.  Within these four
days I returned to Madrid, and on arriving at my Hotel, I there found
this letter waiting for me.

(Here the Marquis unlocked the drawer of a Cabinet: He took out a
folded paper, which He presented to his Auditor.  Lorenzo opened it,
and recognised his Sister's hand.  The Contents were as follows.

Into what an abyss of misery have you plunged me!  Raymond, you force
me to become as criminal as yourself.  I had resolved never to see you
more; if possible, to forget you; If not, only to remember you with
hate.  A Being for whom I already feel a Mother's tenderness, solicits
me to pardon my Seducer, and apply to his love for the means of
preservation.  Raymond, your child lives in my bosom.  I tremble at the
vengeance of the Prioress; I tremble much for myself, yet more for the
innocent Creature whose existence depends upon mine.  Both of us are
lost, should my situation be discovered.  Advise me then what steps to
take, but seek not to see me.  The Gardener, who undertakes to deliver
this, is dismissed, and we have nothing to hope from that quarter:  The
Man engaged in his place is of incorruptible fidelity.  The best means
of conveying to me your answer, is by concealing it under the great
Statue of St. Francis, which stands in the Capuchin Cathedral.  Thither
I go every Thursday to confession, and shall easily have an opportunity
of securing your letter.  I hear that you are now absent from Madrid;
Need I entreat you to write the very moment of your return?  I will not
think it.  Ah! Raymond!  Mine is a cruel situation!  Deceived by my
nearest Relations, compelled to embrace a profession the duties of
which I am ill-calculated to perform, conscious of the sanctity of
those duties, and seduced into violating them by One whom I least
suspected of perfidy, I am now obliged by circumstances to chuse
between death and perjury.  Woman's timidity, and maternal affection,
permit me not to balance in the choice.  I feel all the guilt into
which I plunge myself, when I yield to the plan which you before
proposed to me.  My poor Father's death which has taken place since we
met, has removed one obstacle.  He sleeps in his grave, and I no longer
dread his anger.  But from the anger of God, Oh! Raymond! who shall
shield me?  Who can protect me against my conscience, against myself?
I dare not dwell upon these thoughts; They will drive me mad.  I have
taken my resolution:  Procure a dispensation from my vows; I am ready
to fly with you.  Write to me, my Husband!  Tell me, that absence has
not abated your love, tell me that you will rescue from death your
unborn Child, and its unhappy Mother.  I live in all the agonies of
terror:  Every eye which is fixed upon me seems to read my secret and
my shame.  And you are the cause of those agonies!  Oh! When my heart
first loved you, how little did it suspect you of making it feel such
pangs!

                                      Agnes.

Having perused the letter, Lorenzo restored it in silence.  The Marquis
replaced it in the Cabinet, and then proceeded.)

'Excessive was my joy at reading this intelligence so
earnestly-desired, so little expected.  My plan was soon arranged.
When Don Gaston discovered to me his Daughter's retreat, I entertained
no doubt of her readiness to quit the Convent:  I had, therefore,
entrusted the Cardinal-Duke of Lerma with the whole affair, who
immediately busied himself in obtaining the necessary Bull.
Fortunately I had afterwards neglected to stop his proceedings.  Not
long since I received a letter from him, stating that He expected daily
to receive the order from the Court of Rome.  Upon this I would
willingly have relyed:  But the Cardinal wrote me word, that I must
find some means of conveying Agnes out of the Convent, unknown to the
Prioress.  He doubted not but this Latter would be much incensed by
losing a Person of such high rank from her society, and consider the
renunciation of Agnes as an insult to her House.  He represented her as
a Woman of a violent and revengeful character, capable of proceeding to
the greatest extremities.  It was therefore to be feared, lest by
confining Agnes in the Convent She should frustrate my hopes, and
render the Pope's mandate unavailing.  Influenced by this
consideration, I resolved to carry off my Mistress, and conceal her
till the arrival of the expected Bull in the Cardinal-Duke's Estate.
He approved of my design, and profest himself ready to give a shelter
to the Fugitive.  I next caused the new Gardener of St. Clare to be
seized privately, and confined in my Hotel.  By this means I became
Master of the Key to the Garden door, and I had now nothing more to do
than prepare Agnes for the elopement.  This was done by the letter,
which you saw me deliver this Evening.  I told her in it, that I should
be ready to receive her at twelve tomorrow night, that I had secured
the Key of the Garden, and that She might depend upon a speedy release.

You have now, Lorenzo, heard the whole of my long narrative.  I have
nothing to say in my excuse, save that my intentions towards your
Sister have been ever the most honourable:  That it has always been,
and still is my design to make her my Wife:  And that I trust, when you
consider these circumstances, our youth, and our attachment, you will
not only forgive our momentary lapse from virtue, but will aid me in
repairing my faults to Agnes, and securing a lawful title to her person
and her heart.